In this segment I'm going to talk about
where the huge number of parses for
human languages sentences comes from and
how we might go about solving it
in our statistical parsing system.
So a key part of doing parsing for
human language sentences is
this problem of what's called attachment
from the psychological literature.
It's for various kinds of phrases,
how do we decide what they modify?
So anytime we have prepositional phrases,
adverbial or
participial phrases, infinitives,
coordinations, and things like that,
we have this attachment decision of
working out what are they modifying.
Let's work through an example
to get an idea of that problem.
So here we have a sentence,
The board approved [its acquisition] [by
Royal Trustco Ltd.] [of Toronto] [for
$27 a share] [at its monthly meeting].
And if we look at this sentence,
well, what do we find?
We find that, well,
we have here the subject,
the board, then the verb approved,
and object its acquisition.
But then if we look after that, what
we find is that there are actually four
prepositional phrases in a row,
by Royal Trustco Ltd of Toronto for
$27 a share at its monthly meeting.
And for each of those what we need to
do is decide what are they modifying.
So in general,
a prepositional phrase can modify a verb.
It can modify a preceding noun phrase,
so it's got these two targets.
But actually, each of these prepositional
phrases includes in it a noun phrase.
So once we get to the later
prepositional phrases,
there'll be more things that
each one can choose to modify.
Okay, let's go through each one in turn.
Right, so for by Royal Trustco,
that's modifying the acquisition,
not the approval.
So its acquisition by Royal Trustco.
So that's in dependency format,
we have that relationship.
Okay, of Toronto, this is not modifying
the approval or the acquisition.
Rather, it's Royal Trustco Ltd of Toronto.
So this prepositional phrase is
modifying Royal Trustco Ltd.
Okay, so then if we go on to
the third one, for $27 a share,
that's not modifying Toronto or
Royal Trustco.
It's modifying the acquisition.
So this is an acquisition for $27 a share.
And then for the last prepositional
phrase, at its monthly meeting,
that's presumably not referring to
an acquisition at its monthly meeting, or
any of these other things, but rather
its approval at its monthly meeting.
So this prepositional phrase
modifies the first verb.
Okay, that was kind of complex,
though as human beings,
we just read the sentence and
understand what it means,
and do these attachment decisions without
any apparent effort most of the time.
But the thing we want to think about for
a moment now is how many
possible attachments there are.
Well, if you just sort of
think there are 1, 2, 3,
4 things here and each of them can
attach to a bunch of points, and
each one can be chosen completely freely,
it should be fairly clear that well,
we're going to get exponential
number of possibilities,
exponential in the number
of prepositional phrases.
And it's precisely from that cause
is where this huge number of
parses that we saw previously, like having
600 parses for a sentence, came from.
Then really you're making
a number of decisions for
things like category and attachment.
And a lot of them can
fairly freely combine, so
you multiply out these ambiguities and
you get a huge number.
However, it's not the case
in examples like this
you're completely free to
attach anything anywhere.
So when we did by Royal Trustco,
it could certainly choose to
attach either to the preceding noun or
the verb.
And then syntactically when we attached
of Toronto, it had three choices.
It could attach to Royal Trustco or
to the preceding noun phrase or
to the preceding verb phrase.
And all of those were
syntactically possible.
But once you've made
some higher attachments,
that means earlier in the sentence,
things become more restricted.
So in particular,
once we decided to attach for
$27 a share as a modifier
of its acquisition,
that restricts the attachments that are
possible for this prepositional phrase.
It could still attach to a share, or
it could attach to an acquisition,
or it could attach to approved.
But these ones here that are kind of
hidden behind the attachment of for
$27 a share to an acquisition,
these ones become not possible anymore.
So that leaves kind of
a little puzzle of well,
as you add on prepositional
phrase attachments to a sentence,
how many possible attachments are there
that observe this constraint,
which corresponds to
dependencies not crossing or for
there being a tree structure to
a sentence in a phrase structure grammar?
Well, it turns out
the the answer to that question
is a well-worked-out piece of math.
The answer can be found in the series of
Catalan numbers, which is a sequence that
turns up in a lot of places, wherever
you've got kind of tree-like context.
For example, it even turns up in
probabilistic graphical models.
An the important thing to know
from our purposes is that
the growth of the Catalan numbers
is still an exponential sequence.
We get an exponential number of parses.
Unless you're a math geek,
working through the factorials
there probably isn't the most
useful things to do.
But rather it's probably much
more valuable linguistically to
actually look at what are the possible
structures for a simple sentence and
get a sense of how many there are there.
And so that's what we'll ask you to do
in the quiz question that follows this.
Okay, you've hopefully worked out in the
quiz that the answer that once you have
two prepositional phrases,
the number of possible structures is five.
But rather than focusing
on that number now,
what I want to start doing is focusing
on the two problems that come from
having this exponential possible number
of parses to even quite simple sentences.
So problem number one is that
if we parse naively, and
that means that we use
the simple kinds of top-down or
bottom-up parses that are normally
used in context, like in programming
languages where they're used
with less ambiguous languages.
But that would mean that our parsers end
up doing an exponential amount of work
themselves, and that's no good if we'd
like our parsers to parse quickly.
So where does that exponential
amount of work come from?
Well, the thing to notice is that we're
generating this exponential number
of trees, and that comes about from having
a small number of basic ambiguities.
So in this silly example, we have
the two PPs with cats and with claws.
We're choosing where to
attach each of those.
So there are really only two decisions,
but we're then multiplying that out
into an exponential number of parses.
And in the course of doing that,
what happens is that we do
a lot of repeated work.
So if you look at these parse structures,
you can see that we keep on building
the same piece of structure over and
over again.
So here's a little PP of with claws.
And we build it in this parse, we build it
in that parse, we build it in that parse,
we build it in every parse.
We're always going to have that PP.
But if we just generate all the structures
we're building it over and over again.
And the same is true with
larger bits of structures.
So here's a bigger PP,
with cats with claws.
It also appears in this parse, and so
we are doing completely duplicated
work there, and that goes on.
So here's a verb phrase
of scratch people and
we generate it in that parse and
we generate it in that parse.
And there are other
places in which we build
other pieces of structure
that get repeated over.
So here's a noun phrase
of people with cats and
here's the same piece of noun
phrase of people with cats.
Here is a verb phrase of
scratch people with cats.
And here is again the verb
phrase scratch people with cats
being generated a second time.
So there's just a lot of repeated work.
And so the secret to building efficient
parsers and getting away from doing
an exponential amount of work is to
avoid doing the same work twice.
We only want to find possible pieces of
structure for a sentence precisely once.
And then we'll be able to turn parsing
from an exponential problem into
a polynomial time problem.
The problem is then how to choose the
correct parse, or several likely parses,
out of the many,
many possible parses for a sentence.
How can we do that?
Well, let's look at this simple example.
So this is again the classic here is
a verb with an object noun phrase and
a prepositional phrase
attachment following it.
So it could be that this
modifies the verb so
she is looking through a telescope and
she saw the man with the telescope.
Or it could be that this
modifies the noun, so
this is a man with a telescope and
she saw that person.
Well, which of those is correct?
Well, the answer is that
it could be either.
So this is what's commonly referred
to as an AI complete problem.
Knowing which is correct could depend
on arbitrary knowledge about the world
situation that's being observed or
the prior discourse context in really
complex ways, and
it can be really hard to tell.
Well, that's true, but it turns out that
in a lot of cases you can be pretty sure
what's correct without
understanding a lot.
That just looking at the words that
are involved, the nouns, the verbs, and
the prepositions, you can get a really
good idea of which attachment is correct,
even without having anything like
full understanding of the sentence.
Let's look at a couple of
examples that illustrate this.
Okay, so
here is now some more real text examples.
They have exactly the same structure.
So we've got a verb, a noun phrase,
and our prepositional phrase.
Moscow sent more than 100,000
soldiers into Afghanistan.
So one possibility is that the sending is
into Afghanistan, the verb attachment.
And the other possibility is
it's soldiers into Afghanistan.
Now syntactically,
either of these is possible.
So soldiers into Afghanistan,
would have the same structure
as a phrase like whatever student's
into Lady Gaga or something like that.
All right, it's a possible syntactic
structure, but it's just really,
really unlikely.
You're just very unlikely to
have soldiers into Afghanistan.
And so almost certainly the structure
that we want to choose is with
into Afghanistan modifying sent.
And that's a very common idiom, that you
send something into some environment,
and so we should choose this parse.
And then let's look at this next example.
So in this example, same structure again.
And we can have the PP with
New South Wales head being
a dependent of breached,
breached with New South Wales Health.
Or it can be a dependent of the agreement,
agreement with New South Wales head.
Well, again, breaching with New South
Wales here just isn't very likely.
You just don't say I
breached with my friend.
It doesn't sound very good.
On the other hand,
an agreement with New South Wales Health,
that's really common and normal sounding,
because you make agreements with somebody.
And so this is the attachment
that we should choose.
So that then didn't look that hard,
and that's exactly what we'll do.
Our statistical parsers will try and
exploit such statistics about word
combination, which kind of preposition
is likely to go with which nouns and
which verbs, to be able to choose
the correct parses of sentences without
having full understanding of them.
Okay, I hope that's given
a sense of how parsing
human language sentences can
just be a really bad problem.
But also some idea of how we
can start developing methods
that will solve both the problem of there
being an exponential number of parses,
not causing an exponential amount of work,
and
how we choose the most likely parses for
sentences.